--- Page 1 ---
ARGUMENT
OF THE
FIRST BOOK.

THE book opens with an account of a pestilence that prevailed
in the Grecian camp, and the cause of it is assign'd. A council
is called, in which fierce altercation takes place between Aga-
memnon and Achilles. The latter solemnly renounces the field.
Agamemnon by his heralds demands Brisëis, and Achilles resigns
her. He makes his complaint to Thetis, who undertakes to
plead his cause with Jupiter. She pleads it, and prevails. The
book concludes with an account of what passed in Heaven on
that occasion.

The English reader will be pleased to observe, that by Achaians, Argives,
Danaï, are signified Grecians. Homer himself having found these various
appellatives both graceful and convenient, it seemed unreasonable that a
Translator of him should be denied the same advantage.

--- Page 2 ---
I L I A D.

B O O K I.

ACHILLES sing, O Goddess! Peleus' son;
His wrath pernicious, who ten thousand woes
Caused to Achaia's host, sent many a soul
Illustrious into Ades premature,
And Heroes gave (so stood the will of Jove)
To dogs and to all rav'ning fowls a prey,
When fierce dispute had separated once
The noble Chief Achilles from the son
Of Atreus, Agamemnon, King of men.

Who them to strife impell'd? What Pow'r divine?
Latona's son and Jove's. For He, incensed
Against the King, a foul contagion raised
In all the host, and multitudes destroy'd,
For that the son of Atreus had his priest
Dishonour'd, Chryses. To the fleet he came
Bearing rich ransom glorious to redeem
His daughter, and his hands charged with the wreath
And golden sceptre of the God shaft-arm'd.

His supplication was at large to all
The host of Greece, but most of all to two,
The sons of Atreus, highest in command.

Ye gallant Chiefs, and ye their gallant host,
(So may the Gods who in Olympus dwell
Give Priam's treasures to you for a spoil

B 2 And

--- Page 3 ---
4 HOMER'S ILIAD. Book I.

And ye return in safety) Take my gifts 25
And loose my child, in honour of the son
Of Jove, Apollo, archer of the skies.

At once the voice of all was to respect
The priest, and to accept the bounteous price;
But so it pleased not Atreus' mighty son, 30
Who with rude threat'nings stern him thence dismiss'd.

Beware, old man! that at these hollow barks
I find thee not now ling'ring, or henceforth
Returning, lest the garland of thy God
And his bright sceptre should avail thee nought. 35
I will not loose thy daughter, 'till old age
Steal on her. From her native country far,
In Argos, in my palace, she shall ply
The loom, and shall be partner of my bed.
Move me no more. Be gone; hence while thou may'st. 40

He spake, the old priest trembled and obey'd.
Forlorn he roamed the ocean's sounding shore,
And, solitary, with much pray'r his King
Bright-hair'd Latona's son, Phœbus, implored.

God of the silver bow, who with thy power 45
Encirclest Chrysa, and who reign'st supreme
In Tenedos and Cilla the divine,
* Sminthian Apollo! If I e'er adorned
Thy beauteous fane, or on thy altar burn'd
The fat acceptable of bulls or goats, 50
Grant my petition. With thy shafts avenge
On the Achaian host thy servant's tears.

* So called on account of his having saved the people of Troas from a plague of mice, sminthos in their language meaning a mouse.

Such

--- Page 4 ---
Book I. HOMER'S ILIAD. 5

Such prayer he made, and it was heard. The God,
Down from Olympus with his radiant bow
And his full quiver o'er his shoulder slung, 55
Marched in his anger; shaken as he moved
His rattling arrows told of his approach.
Gloomy he came as night; sat from the ships
Apart, and sent an arrow. Clang'd the cord
* Dread-sounding, bounding on the silver bow. 60
Mules first and dogs he struck, but at themselves
Dispatching soon his bitter arrows keen,
Smote them. Death-piles on all sides always blazed.
Nine days throughout the camp his arrows flew;
The tenth, Achilles from all parts convened 65
The host in council. Juno the white-armed,
Moved at the sight of Grecians all around
Dying, imparted to his mind the thought.
The full assembly, therefore, now convened,
Uprose Achilles ardent, and began. 70

Atrides! Now, it seems, no course remains
For us, but that the seas roaming again,
We hence return; at least if we survive;
But haste, consult we quick some prophet here
Or priest, or ev'n interpreter of dreams, 75
(For dreams are also of Jove) that we may learn
By what crime we have thus incensed Apollo,
What broken vow, what hecatomb unpaid

* For this singular line the Translator begs to apologize, by pleading the strong
desire he felt to produce an English line, if possible, somewhat resembling in its effect
the famous original one.

Δεινὴ δὲ κλαγγὴ γένετ᾽ ἀργυρέοιο βιοῖο.

He

--- Page 5 ---
6 HOMER'S ILIAD. Book I.

He charges on us, and if soothed with steam
Of lambs or goats unblemish'd, he may yet 80
Be won to spare us, and avert the plague.
He spake and sat, when Thestor's son arose
Calchas, an augur foremost in his art,
Who all things, present, past, and future knew,
And whom his skill in prophecy, a gift 85
Conferr'd by Phœbus on him, had advanced
To be conductor of the fleet to Troy;
He, prudent, them admonishing, replied.
Jove-lov'd Achilles! Would'st thou learn from me
What cause hath mov'd Apollo to this wrath, 90
The shaft-arm'd King? I shall divulge the cause.
But thou, swear first and cov'nant on thy part
That speaking, acting, thou wilt stand prepared
To give me succour; for I judge amiss,
Or he who rules the Argives, the supreme 95
O'er all Achaia's host, will be incensed.
Woe to the man who shall provoke the King!
For if, to day, he smother close his wrath,
He harbours still the vengeance, and in time
Performs it. Answer, therefore, wilt thou save me? 100
To whom Achilles, swiftest of the swift.
What thou hast learn'd in secret from the God,
That speak, and boldly. By the son of Jove,
Apollo, whom thou, Calchas, seek'st in prayer
Made for the Danaï, and who thy soul 105
Fills with futurity, in all the host
The Grecian lives not, who while I shall breathe,
And see the light of day, shall in this camp
Oppress
