--- Page 1 ---
808.8
C33W
GONZAGA UNIVERSITY

THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE

TO THE READER: God bless me, and with what eagerness shouldst thou be now awaiting, reader illustrious, or it may be plebeian, this prologue, expecting to find in it retaliations, wranglings, and railings against the author of the second "Don Quixote"! I mean him who they say was begotten at Tordesillas, and born at Tarragona. In truth, then, I am not about to give thee this satisfaction, for though injuries awake anger in the meekest bosoms, in mine the rule should suffer exception. Thou wouldst have me hurl at him "ass," "fool," and "bully"; but I have no thought of doing so. Let his sin be his punishment, -- with his bread let him eat it, and there let it be. That which I cannot help feeling is that he charges me with being old and maimed, as though it had been in my power to stop time from passing over me, or as though my deformity had been produced in some tavern, and not on the grandest occasion which ages past or present have seen, or those to come can hope to see. If my wounds do not shine in the eyes of him who looks on them, they are at least honored in the estimation of those who know where they were acquired; for the soldier looks better dead in battle than safe in flight. And so much am I of this opinion, that if now I could devise and bring about the impossible, I would rather be again present in that wonderful action than now be whole of my wounds, without having taken part therein. Those the soldier shows in his face and in his breast are stars which guide others to the heaven of honor and to the coveting of deserved praise; and it should be considered that it is not with gray hairs one writes but with the understanding, which is wont to grow better with years. I have felt, also, his calling me envious, and explaining to me, as to one who is ignorant, what kind of thing envy is; and in very truth, of two

AA iii

ACCESSION No. 14023

--- Page 2 ---
iv DON QUIXOTE

kinds of it there are, I know only the righteous, the noble, and the well-meaning. And this being as it is, I am not likely to persecute any ecclesiastic, above all, if he is a familiar of the holy office to boot; and if he said what he did on account of him for whom he seemed to say it, he is wholly mistaken, for I adore the man's genius, admire his works and his application, continuous and virtuous. But indeed I am grateful to this writer for saying that my "Novels" are more satirical than exemplary, though they are good, -- which they could not be if they were not so in everything.

Methinks thou art telling me that I am exercising much self-restraint, and am keeping myself much within the bounds of modesty, from knowing that one should not heap affliction on the afflicted; and that from which this gentleman suffers should doubtless be great since he dares not appear in the open field and under the clear sky -- hiding his name and disguising his country as though he had committed some crime of high treason. If perchance thou shouldst come to know him, tell him from me that I am not aggrieved, for I know well what the temptations of the devil are, and that one of the greatest is the putting it into a man's head that he is able to write a book by which he will get as much fame as money, and as much money as fame; and in confirmation of this, I would have thee, in thy pleasant and graceful way, tell him this story.

There was in Cordova a madman, who had a habit of carrying, on top of his head, a piece of marble slab or stone, of no light weight; and when he met with any unwary dog, would go up close to him and let the weight fall plump on top of him. The dog, in a rage, would yelp and howl up three streets without stopping. It so happened that among the dogs on whom he discharged his load was one, the dog of a hatter, whom his master much loved. The stone descended; caught him on the head; the battered beast set up a howl; the master saw it and was enraged. He caught up a yard measure and rushed out after the madman, and left him with not a bone whole, crying out at every blow he gave him: "Rascally hound! My pointer! Didst not see, cruel wretch, that my dog was a pointer?" and repeating the

--- Page 3 ---
AUTHOR'S PREFACE v

word "pointer" many times, he sent the madman away beaten to a jelly. The madman took his correction to heart, and went off, and for more than a month did not venture out in public; at the end of which period he returned with his invention and a heavier load. He would go up to where the dog lay, and regarding it very intently, not caring or daring to let the stone fall, he would say: "This is a pointer! Beware!" In short, all the dogs he met, whether mastiffs or turnspits, he averred were pointers, and so let fall his stone no more. So it may be, perhaps, with this story-teller, who will not venture to discharge any more the load of his wit in books, which, as they are bad, are harder than rocks. Let him know also that for his threat to deprive me of my profit by means of his book I care not a doit, for, adapting to myself the famous farce of "La Perendenga," I answer, "Long live the alderman my master and Christ for all!" Long live the great Conde de Lemos, whose Christian charity and well-known liberality maintain me against all the strokes of my scant fortune; and long live for me the supreme benevolence of his Eminence of Toledo, Don Bernardo Sandoval y Rojas, even though there be no more printing-presses in the world, and even though there be printed against me more books than there are letters in the couplets of "Mingo Revulgo." These two princes, without my soliciting them with any adulation of mine or any kind of flattery of them, of their own goodness alone have taken it on themselves to do me kindness and favor, in which I esteem myself luckier and richer than if Fortune had placed me on her highest pinnacle by the ordinary way. The poor man may attain to honor, but not the vicious. Poverty may cloud nobility, but not obscure it wholly. Let but virtue show some glimmer of light, though it be through the chinks and straits of penury, and it comes to be regarded and consequently favored of lofty and noble spirits. And say thou no more to him, nor will I say more to thee than to bid thee to take note that this Second Part of "Don Quixote," which I offer thee, is cut by the same hand and out of the same cloth as the First; and that in it I present thee with Don Quixote at fuller length, and in the end dead and buried, so that no one may presume to raise new testimonies to him, for the past are sufficient;

--- Page 4 ---
vi DON QUIXOTE

and sufficient also it is that an honest man should have told the story of these witty follies without caring to go into them afresh; for the abundance of things, be they ever so good, makes them to be of little worth; and scarcity, even of things that are bad, confers a certain value.

I forgot to tell thee that thou mayest look out for the "Persiles," which I am now finishing, and the Second Part of "Galatea."
